Let's go through calculating residuals and
we're going to use the diamond dataset.
Let's see.
So, our data is the diamond dataset.
So let's do that.
I'm going to redefine price as y,
x as carat and n as, as the length of the,
the number of pairs, just so
I don't have to type so much.
Now, I'm going to assign
to a variable named fit.
I'm going to assign my linear regression
object that gets created from lm.
So let me do that.
Now the easiest way to get
the residuals is just do
resid of fit, so
I'm going to define those as e.
Let me show you another way to get
the residuals that of course has to do
the same thing.
If I were to get my predicted fitted
values and remember, if I don't give
the predict function new data,
if I just give it the output from lm, the,
the assignment from ln, then it will
just predict at the observed x values.
So yhat now is a vector of predictions
at the observed carat values.
Now, I just want to show you that my
residual's calculated via the red,
resid functions are the same as the
residuals that I'm calculating manually,
which is just subtracting y and yhat.
So the way to do that is just take the
difference, the absolute differences and
find the largest one.
And I see that the largest one is on
the scale of 10 to the minus 13th.
So, up to numerical precision,
it's the same thing.
Then lastly, I just want to show
that if I manually even calculate
the fitted values, coef fit 1 and
then coef fit 2 times x,
that I of course will get very,
I get exactly the same numbers.
So, up to numeric precision,
exactly the same.
So the way you want to do it to
get the residuals is resid, but
hopefully showing you this other
code will illustrate what's going on
in the background with what res, the
actual calculation that resid is doing.
Finally, let me show you that
the sum of my residuals is zero.
Well, it's 10 to the minus 14th,
which is close enough to zero for me.
And then also the sum of my residuals
times the price variable x,
that also has to be zero.
Well, 10 to the minus 15th.
So, up to numerical position
is zero in both cases.
So the residuals are the sign lengths
of the red line that undershown
the following plot.
And I'm going to do this using
base R graphics, just so
I mix a little base R with
some ggplot graphics.
So, I'm going to create my plot here,
there's my plot.
I'm going to add the fitted line and in
base R, if you want to add the fitted line
and you fit a regression line, you can
just do abline and put the object that you
assign to the lm fit just as an argument
and it will add the regression line.
Here I want the line width to be two,
so it shows up a little bit better.
And then I'm just going to for loop over,
over the data values to
add in the red lines.
Let me zoom in and show you that plot.
There's my plot.
Now my residuals are these red lines.
These distances,
where if the point is above the line,
the residual will be positive.
And if the point is below the line,
the residual will be negative.
This scatter plot isn't particularly
useful for assessing residual variation.
Notice all of the blank
space in this part and
this part of the graph, making the plot
kind of useless for that purpose.
So, instead,
why don't we plot the residuals
on the vertical axis versus
mass on the horizontal axis?
Let's go ahead and
run the code and here's the plot.
Now we can see the residual
variation much more clearly.
When you look at a residual plot,
you're looking at,
you're looking for any form of pattern.
The residuals should
be mostly patternless.
Also, remember that if we've included an
intercept, residuals have to sum to zero.
So they have to lie above and
below this horizontal line at zero,
and you'd like them to be sort
of nicely in a random looking
fashion distributed both above and
below zero.
We can see some interesting patterns
by honing in on the residual plot here.
For example, we can see that
there were lots of diamonds of
exactly the same mass measured in the,
in this sort of gets lost in the scatter
plot by zooming in this way,
we, we notice that particular feature.
Next, what we're going to go through
some pathological residual plots,
just to highlight what
residual plots can do for you.
So, I've concocted some examples that will
help us to understand how residuals
can highlight in on model fit.
So let's look in the R mark down file and
I'm going to show it again at the console
rather than going through the slides,
so you can actually watch me doing it.
X here is just going to be
uniform from minus 3 to plus 3.
So, I've created a x variable
that's just a kind of a random
smattering of points between
the values 3 and minus 3.
My y is equal to x, so
it's an identity line, but
then I'm going to add
another term that's sin x.
So, it should look like an identity line,
but kind of oscillating around it a little
bit and then I'm adding some
normal noise on top of it.
So let me add my y and I'm going to switch
back to ggplot, because I like it better.
So then base graphics now.
So you, I've created my gg plot.
I'm going to, I'm going to go ahead and
add the smooth first,
because I want it as the bottom most layer
and then I'm going to add my two sets
of points and there's my,
there's my scatter plot.
And so let me zoom in and it's a little
difficult to see the non-linearity,
that sin x term is very,
it's a little apparent, but it's,
it's kind of very hard to see.
I think if I was looking at this,
I would immediately notice something
pattern asking the for fit here.
But nonetheless,
it's maybe a little bit hard to see.
Before I move on to the residual plot,
let me make a comment.
This model is actually the not, is, is,
is actually not the correct model for
this data and
this might happen in practice.
This doesn't mean that this
model is unimportant, right?
There is a linear trend and
the model is accounting for it,
it's just not accounting for
the secondary variation in the sign term.
So, I just want to emphasize this in
regression modelling is just because you
aren't fitting the actually correct model,
that doesn't mean the model
is itself useless.
You have about, you know, an average
identity line here that represents
the relationship between y and x and
it explains a lot of the variation.
So, I just want to remind
you that in regression,
having the exact right model is
not always the primary goal.
You can get meaningful information
about trends from incorrect models.
So, I just want to get that
statement out of the way, but
now let's hone in on the residuals.
So plot the residuals versus x and
see if it makes this component of
the fifth sin x term more apparent.
Okay.
So let me plot the residual.
The residual's versus the x variable.
So just to describe what I have,
I'm going to assign g as my ggplot.
My x is in this case, x.
I have defined the x variable
as the variable named x.
But now, my y is not the y variable, but
it's going to be the residual
from the linear model fit.
In here, I just grab it in that R command
right there, then my aesthetic for
my ggplot, just has x and y as the names
of variables for the horizontal and
vertical axis variables.
So let me run that command and
then I want to put a horizontal
line reference line at zero and
then I want to add my points and
set the axes how I'd like and
then let's see the plot and
there's the plot.
Let me zoom in.
And here is the plot and
I think what you can see is that this
sign term is now extremely apparent.
That what the residual plot has done is,
it's zoomed in,
on this part of the model inadequacy and
really highlighted it and
that's one thing that residual
plots are especially good at.
I'm going to show you another
one where by all appearances,
the plot falls perfectly on a line.
But when you highlight in, at
the residuals, it looks quite different.
So let me run the commands and
then I'll show you.
So there's the plot and
then now, so look at that and
it seems like the points fall
exactly on an identity line.
Now let me highlight in on
the residuals and you see this
trend toward greater variability
as you head along the x variable.
That property,
where the variability increases with the x
variables called heteroscedasticity.
Heteroscedasticity is one of those things
that residual plots are quite good at
diagnosing and you couldn't see it.
If I go back to this earlier plot,
you can't see it at all here.
Zoom in on the residuals and
there you see it there.
Let me just zoom back here
to how I generated the data,
just to illustrate it for you.
My x variable is a bunch of
uniform random variables.
My y variable is my x variable,
so an identity line.
But then when I added the errors,
the standard deviation of the errors,
look right here has the x
term involved in it and
that's how I generated data
with heteroscedasticity.
So let's run the residual plot for
the diamond data.
So here, I'm just going to add a column
for the diamond data that is the residuals
from regression model fit where price is
the outcome and carat is the predictor.
So, I run that and now my data frame.
My data frame has carat price and
now the residuals.
So, I'm going to create my ggplot.
My x label is going to be Mass in carats.
My y label is going to
be Residual price and
I just want to emphasize that the
residuals have the same units as the ys.
So the residual price is
in Singapore dollars.
I'm going to add my horizontal line.
I'm going to add my points and
then there's the plot.
So there doesn't appear to be
a lot of pattern in the plot, so
this, this is good it seems
like it's a pretty good fit.
Let me illustrate something
about variability in a diamond
dataset that will help
us set the stage for
defining some new properties
about our regression model fit.
So I'm going to create
now two residual vectors.
The first residual vector is the one
where I just fit an intercept.
So the residuals are just the deviations
around the average price,
then I'm going to find
the residuals where I add in.
Our variation around the regression line.
So the first one is variation
around the average price.
The second is the variation around
the regression line with carats
as the explanatory variable and
price as the outcome.
So, I'm going to run that and
then I want to create
a factor variable that
labels the set of residuals.
The first one is just going to be labeled
as a bunch of intercept only model
residuals and the second set are going to
be labeled as a bunch of intercept and
slope residuals,
then I want to create a ggplot.
My, with this data frame, my y
variable is going to be the residuals.
My x variable is going to be the fit,
which is the two fits it is.
Linear model or
linear model with just an intercept or
the linear model with carat,
the mass as the predictor.
And I want to fill in my points based on
the color, based on the which fit it was.
So, I'm going to do that and then
the kind of plot I want is a dot plot and
then I want to put my axes
labels the way I'd like.
Now let's see the plot.
There it is.
So what we see on this left-hand
plot with just the intercept
is the variation in diamond prices
around the average diamond price.
So just the, basically the variation
in diamond prices from the sample.
What we're seeing in the rightmost plot,
this is displaying the variation
around the regression line Mind.
So what we've done is we've
explained a lot of this
variation with the relationship with mass.
And what we're going to talk about next is
r squared, which basically says, we can
decompose this total variation, this
variation in the y's by themselves leaving
you with just the mean into the variation
explained by the regression model and
the variation that's left over after
accounting for the regression model.
So this is the variation that's left over
after counting for the regression, but
also this sort of subtraction of these two
would be the variation that was explained
by the regression model.
But there's a formula for that and
we're going to dive into that next.